>> Bruce Lipton 2.
Take 1.
Marker.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Who are you?
>> I am a happy guy.
And I had to learn that,
because maybe 40 years,
that was questionable.
But the last number of
years has been a joy.
>> Well, how did
you get that way?
>> First, understanding I was
responsible for whether I wanted
to be happy or not.
And then that was a decision.
Do you want this or do you
want-- oh, I want that one.
And then chose it.
It works.
>> Well, you write that "I
have come full circle from
a reductionist, scientific take
on life to a spiritual one,
also from an agnostic scientist
to a card-carrying mystic."
How so?
How did you get that way?
>> Well, for the most
formative years of my life,
you get a lot of wisdom from
so-called "spiritual people."
But as a kid, you could see
through it all of a sudden--
And said, well,
the words are nice,
but their lives don't
even match anything
that they're talking about.
And there's some point
where, even as a kid,
it's like, how valid is that
statement if that person is
living this way?
And so at some point, I just
disregarded spirituality as not
really relevant because
it didn't serve those that
were telling me about it,
and dove into science,
because science was--
whatever was true in science
on this side of the planet
was true on the other
side of the planet.
So it was a pervasive truth.
And I love science.
And this has really
got me into the field.
And then I was most
fortunate to be
at the right place
at the right time
to work on stem cells, which
everybody hears about today,
but this was over 50 years ago.
And I was cloning stem cells.
And nobody really even
knew about stem cells,
but I was working with them.
And as I started
working with them,
I started to realize,
through my research,
that the fate of
the cells was not
controlled by their genetics.
The fate of the cell was
controlled by the environment
that they were in.
And all of a sudden, it takes
away the concept of genetics.
And I go, what's the
relevance of genetics?
So if I say, this trait is
under genetic control, what
that means in people's mind is
there's an automatic system,
a gene is going to turn on,
it's going to engage the trait,
and that's my
behavior or my life.
And then I go, well,
that's really interesting.
When we are teaching
that, what are we
teaching people about genetics?
I go, well, genes
control your life.
That, as far as we
know, you didn't
pick the genes you came with.
And if you don't like the
characteristics you have,
you can't change those genes.
And then we add on top
of that that the genes
turn on and off by themselves.
I say, what are we teaching?
Victimization.
You're a victim
of your heredity.
And it becomes really critical
because victim means powerless.
And if people are programmed
that their health is
beyond their control, then
they seek someone powerful that
will facilitate their health.
And so they give up power.
I'm powerless, so
I have no power,
but I accept what you say,
and that becomes my truth.
And then what, really,
the root comes down
to is understanding that
consciousness is translated
by the brain into
complementary chemistry, which
goes into the blood, and that
blood nourishes and instructs
50 trillion cells.
So the chemistry of the
blood is controlling
the genetics and the
behavior, but the chemistry
comes from the brain.
I go, yeah, but which chemistry?
Whatever picture is
held in the mind.
So for example, if
you say, I'm in love--
a picture of love--
I go, well that's a
beautiful picture.
All the romantic movie stuff.
And I go, if that's in your
mind, the chemistry that
comes from that love primarily
is dopamine, which is pleasure.
That's why we seek it.
Oxytocin is another
chemical released in love
because that bonds
me to the source.
Vasopressin is released,
because that chemical
makes me more attractive to my
partner so my partner stays.
And most importantly,
growth hormone
is released when you're in love.
And I go, what is that relevant?
I say, growth hormone is
what keeps you healthy
and maintains your biology.
So I say, so the chemical
cocktail translated from love
manifests an expression in the
body of health and harmony.
And that's why people, they say,
oh, look how in love they are.
See how they glow?
That glow is biology.
And I say, yeah, but
why are they glowing?
I say because the
environment of that chemistry
enhances vitality.
And I say, wait, same
person opens up their eyes
and sees something
that scares them,
you don't release
the love cocktail.
You release stress
hormones and factors
that affect the immune system.
And I go, this is a completely
different chemistry.
I go, oh, so if I have a
picture of love, I am healthy.
But then we find out
that a picture of fear
generates chemistry that
puts us into a protection.
That's what fear is all about.
I need protection.
And I say, so what?
I say, well, then, the chemicals
that are released in fear
redirect the body's
energy away from growth
and puts the energy
into everything
I need to escape the fear.
So I say, oh, so
what does it mean?
I say, the moment you
have fear, stress hormones
shut down the growth and
maintenance of the body.
I go, why?
Because why should
I expend energy
to grow the body if I'm being
chased by a saber toothed tiger?
I want all of the energy
available to escape the tiger.
So I redirect the
energy in the body
with the chemistry
that comes from fear,
redirects it not toward
maintenance of the body,
but redirects it toward
escaping the fear.
And I go, and most
important aspect of that
is that stress hormones
shut down the immune system.
So why should they do that?
And the answer is this--
because the immune system uses
so much energy that when
people are sick, sometimes,
they don't even have the
energy to get out of bed.
So then I put a situation here.
I say, you have a bacterial
infection, I always like to add,
possibly diarrhea
coming from this.
And you say, oh, I want my
immune system to handle this.
And I say, but at
the same time, you're
being chased by a
saber toothed tiger.
Where do you want
the energy to go?
You want to split it?
And I go, are you kidding me?
I put everything in to
running away from the tiger,
because if the
tiger catches you,
that bacteria is no longer
your problem at that moment.
So the idea is, stress hormones
shut down the immune system
to conserve energy
to escape the threat.
All of this sounds, on paper,
this is a beautiful mechanism.
And then I say, but when
was this mechanism designed?
I say hundreds of
thousands of years ago.
And I say, oh, then,
well, what fears
did we have 100,000 years ago?
I go, saber toothed tiger.
I go, so what?
I say, so I'm living in
growth, the happy part, feeding
my system, nourishing
and everything.
The tiger shows up.
The stress hormones are
released into the body.
That allows me to run like crazy
to get away from that tiger.
So maximum 10
minutes, I'm running.
I escape.
Now what?
I say, oh, I go back
to growth again.
So the inhibition
of body maintenance
and the inhibition of the immune
system is not a long-term thing.
It's supposed to
be just minutes.
But today's world,
stress is 24/7/365.
We were not designed
for prolonged inhibition
of the maintenance of
the body or prolonged
shutting down the immune system,
because this opens us up,
now, for infection and disease.
And so the interesting aspect
about that is since we have
programmed the public,
oh, disease is connected
to your genes, well,
let's-- a fact of science.
Less than 1% of disease
is connected to genes.
Over 90% of illness is
connected to environment
and our perception or
response to that environment.
And all of a sudden, I say, why?
Well, then, the
pathologies that affect us,
we're not genetically designed
to have those pathologies.
We are manifesting them.
There's no cancer gene--
a fact of life.
There is not one gene
that causes cancer.
You want to get cancer?
Oh, you have to
activate over 10.
Usually 15 to 20 different genes
must be activated simultaneously
to manifest a cancer.
I go, that many different genes?
If I said one gene
causes cancer,
you say, oh, one gene mutated.
I got cancer.
I go, it takes 10, 15, 20 genes.
I go, oh, well, then, all
of a sudden coincidence
is not part of it.
Now, there's an expression of
life contributing to the cancer.
And therefore, we end
up blaming the gene,
saying the genes cause cancer.
That disempowers us, because
as I said, I have no control.
The genes did it.
And then I go, but
the reality is,
there is no genetic
linkage to cancer.
Cancer is an inappropriate
response to an interpretation
of the world.
The environment they live
in, the perceptions they have
are manifesting in a cancer.
So what people
really need to hear
is, cancer is a
symptom, not a problem.
I go, so what?
I go, the way we've
created medicine
and pharmaceutical companies
is if you have a symptom,
we try to stop it.
I go, yeah, but the
symptom isn't the problem.
So you can put any kind of drug
that kill your cancer cells--
chemotherapy, radiation-- say,
oh, I killed the stupid cells.
And I go, they were a
symptom of something higher.
And that's why the
outcome of cancer
is based on the consciousness
of the individual.
If that person feels
they're a total victim,
they really just succumb to--
the cancer beats me
because I'm a victim.
And there are other people who
say, I'm not accepting that.
Forget that whole idea
of that prognosis.
And I go, what about them?
I say, they have the best
chance of never having a cancer,
because they didn't attribute
the cancer to something
out of their control.
They start to recognize,
my life is not in harmony.
I'm stressed all the time.
Survival is questionable.
And I go, oh, well, that's
a source of stress hormones
and that's a source of
inhibiting the immune system.
And just to emphasize,
how powerful
is stress hormones in shutting
down the immune system?
The answer is simple.
Medical doctors give
patients stress hormones
before they transplant a
foreign organ into them.
So if I'm going to receive
a kidney, a lung, a heart,
before I get that transplant,
I am given stress hormones
by the medical doctor.
I go, why?
Because it will inhibit
the immune system
and prevent me from
rejecting the foreign organ
the moment put into the system.
So all of a sudden, I
say, oh, my god, they
use stress hormones
therapeutically
to shut down the immune system.
What do you think happens to the
average person on the street?
They are, in fear, shutting
down and compromising
their immune system--
not because the immune
system won't work.
It's because you're redirecting
the energy of the body
to escape a fear.
>> So from this story, I'm
hearing that you came full
circle with spirituality,
because now,
we're starting to talk about the
mindset and what you need to do
to be able to get you on
the track that you really,
really want to be on, right?
>> Yes.
Well, one of the hardest things
to understand is simply this--
that we are programmed.
The movie "The Matrix" is
like a science fiction story.
No, the movie "The
Matrix" is a documentary.
We've all been programmed.
I say, why?
Step back and make a
simple understanding.
We talk about the
brain being a computer.
It is-- a computer
beyond anything
that humans have
created, which, again,
refers to the intelligence
of the cells over humans.
I go, so what's the relevance?
It's a computer, just like any.
I go, what's the relevance?
Well, first, you have to
have an operating system.
I say, oh.
In the last trimester
of fetal development,
the operating system is engaged.
I go, yeah, but I go to the
store, buy a brand-new computer,
bring it home, push on, it boots
up, operating system is there.
Boots up.
Now, I say do something.
And you go, like what?
I say, oh, a drawing,
spreadsheet, Word document.
I go, oh, I can't do that.
I say, why not?
First, you have to
put in a program
so you can operate the computer.
The startup, booting up, it
says the computer's ready,
but there's no program.
From the last trimester of
pregnancy through age seven,
the function of the brain
is not at a higher vibration
of consciousness, alpha
and beta and gamma.
It's at a lower vibration.
By testing with
wires on a head--
EEG-- the vibration
of a developing child
is predominantly in theta,
which is below consciousness.
What does theta represent?
I said, it's expressed
as, well, a child's
creating a reality,
a fantasy world,
coming into the real world.
Theta is a mixture of
fantasy and reality.
I can ride a broom, but in my
mind as a kid, it's not a broom.
It is a full-blown stallion.
And so my mother says, give me
the broom, I'm looking at her,
I don't even know what the
heck she's talking about.
This isn't a broom,
it's a horse.
Or I love it, the
famous tea party.
We pour nothing into that
cup and drink this nothing
and go, oh, that was
the best tea I ever had.
And I go, theta--
fantasy and reality
coming together.
That's a character-- up
until, by seven, it changes,
because then, we get a higher
vibration called consciousness,
alpha.
So in this pre-seven
period, I say, what is
the function of being in theta?
Are you ready?
Theta is hypnosis.
This is why when you want
to hypnotize somebody
in the old-fashioned way--
they used to use a watch,
and watch this, and it's
like, what is it doing?
It's slowing down
your consciousness
to focus on that little watch.
And as you drop consciousness
down, guess what?
You're now entering
into the theta zone.
So that's what relaxing is
all about in hypnotherapy.
Stop the function of
the higher vibration,
calm down, get into theta.
I say, so what is hypnosis?
It takes environmental
experiences
and downloads them into
the subconscious mind.
So I'm a young boy.
How do I know what the rules
are to be a member of a family
and to be a member
of a community?
There are rules.
You can't go out and
do what you want.
And so where do you
get the rules from?
A young kid doesn't read a book.
I say, ah, nature
helped him out.
Said, you want to
know the rules,
put you in record,
watch your parents.
Watch your siblings.
Watch your community.
What you're observing is not
going into the conscious mind.
It's not functioning
at that level.
What you're observing is
going download straight
into the subconscious mind.
So where do you get your
behavioral programs from?
Not from you.
You get them by observing
the people or individuals
that you put as, these
are the important people--
my teachers, mom, dad,
siblings, and community.
I observe them, download them.
I go, oh, well, interesting.
The conscious mind isn't
working at that point.
No, it's not working.
I say, why is it relevant?
And the answer is this.
What got downloaded into
your subconscious programming
was never reviewed by you.
It wasn't filtered by you.
I say, what does that mean?
I say, I can get good
programs and bad programs,
and I'm just getting programs.
So I have no understanding,
when the programs are coming in,
are these really good or bad?
I'm just recording.
So unfortunately, about
70% of those programs
are disempowering,
self-sabotaging, limiting
beliefs that we acquire.
So I say, oh, I'm getting
programmed, and most of them
are not going to strengthen
my existence on this planet.
And I go, oh, wow.
I go, well, I don't have
to worry about the program
if I-- because
the next evolution
is, I start to
get consciousness.
That's creative.
Subconscious-- habits,
programs, downloaded.
This is the way life is.
That's the program.
Conscious mind is creative.
Well, I'd rather have this,
and I would like to have that.
That's your choice
kind of thing.
So I go, oh, yeah,
that's what makes humans
different than lower animals.
Lower animals are stimulus,
response, stimulus, response.
No thought.
The birds come to Capistrano.
When?
On a day.
How do they know that day?
Did they look at the calendar?
I go, no, it's built into the
environmental information.
The turtles come out of
the eggs and they all
come out on about,
essentially, the same day.
I go, wow, what a coincidence.
It's not a coincidence.
It's built into the environment.
But it's not thinking.
It's not creative.
This is where we
distinguish ourselves above.
So I say, well, I can
create Heaven on Earth.
I go, that's an idea.
That's pretty good.
And using the conscious
mind, I can manifest it.
So I say, oh, according
to quantum physics,
the most valid
science on the planet,
consciousness is what is
creating our life experiences.
So I said, well, what if
I have a consciousness
of Heaven on Earth?
I go, well, then, you
manifest Heaven on Earth.
And then I go, well, this
is really good, because I
can create what I want.
I go, one small monkey wrench
that blows the whole thing.
And I go, what is that?
Consciousness is
indeed creative,
but consciousness can think.
And being creative, that
thinking, is really good.
But then I say, if
consciousness is thinking, then
where is the answer to whatever
I'm seeking going to come from?
It's going to come
from my brain.
Consciousness is
reviewing, thinking,
putting pictures together.
And I go, yeah, but
if I'm thinking,
am I looking out at the world
or is my focus looking in?
And I go, well, that's
the unfortunate part.
Thought is on the inside.
So consciousness is redirected.
Instead of looking at the world
and adjusting my behavior,
it's redirected.
And now I'm focusing on thought.
Wait.
Let's say I'm driving
a car down the street.
And if I'm thinking as I'm
driving, then all of a sudden,
my consciousness is not going
to pay attention to the road.
And all of a sudden, well, now,
we're in a serious problem.
I've got a car going 60 miles
an hour down the highway
and my consciousness
is now looking inside.
Who's driving the car?
And this is the
crux of the problem.
The moment consciousness is
busy, subconscious is autopilot.
It knows how to walk.
It knows anything you learn.
You drive the car.
You learned how
to drive the car.
Your job.
Once you learn it, you don't
have to think about it.
It's an automatic habit.
So basically, it says this.
You can create your life
with your conscious mind,
but it turns out 95% of the day,
the conscious mind is thinking.
Oh, so what does that mean?
I say, the 95% of the
day, your behavior
is not controlled by the
creative wishes and desires.
It's now controlled by
the downloaded program
that I got from somebody else.
And I go, what if those
are negative programs--
which 70% are?
I say, this is the problem.
Since consciousness is
not observing my behavior
because it's inside
looking for thoughts, then
whatever behavior is being
expressed at that moment,
consciousness does
not observe it.
It's inside.
So I say, well,
what does that mean?
I say, well, if you
have a negative program,
you will manifest negative
behavior and you won't see it.
Everybody else will.
So how many years now?
30 some plus years I've
used this one story.
It's been repeated 1,000 times.
But it's so pivotal
to understanding
I'm going to say it again.
And that is this.
You have a friend, and you
know your friend's behavior
very well.
And you happen to know
your friend's parent.
And one day, you see your friend
has the exact same behavior
as their parent.
Well, of course,
you can't hold back.
Hey, Bill, you're
just like your dad.
Then I say, back away from
Bill, because the moment
you say that, the first
thing Bill is going to say
is, how can you
compare me to my dad?
I'm nothing like my dad.
And everyone in the
audience laughs.
And I say, they laugh
because they understand.
I said, what do you mean?
They all have seen somebody
deny their behavior.
And I go, why is it relevant?
Because everybody else
can see the behavior
that Bill is expressing.
Who's the one that can't see it?
Bill.
Why not?
Because the reason he's
playing that behavior,
he's not paying attention.
So what's the point?
The point is this.
95% of your life is not coming
from the wishes and desires
of the creative mind,
which is busy thinking.
It's going to come
from the programs.
And I go, yeah, but
the programs mainly
didn't even come from you.
They came from somebody else.
You downloaded somebody
else's behavior.
And if that behavior
doesn't support
your program and
your wishes, too bad,
because that's the program
that's going to play,
whether you see it or not.
And this is why Bill cannot
see he's like his dad.
And the most profound ending--
sorry.
Save it.
Big drum roll.
Profound ending.
Is this.
We are all Bill.
Every one of us is
doing this every day.
And I go, what is the relevance?
And now, we put the
story into conclusion.
It's this.
Creative mind-- I want love, I
want health, I want happiness,
I want a great job, I
want money, I want this.
I go, that's good creativity.
I say, so, in the
morning, you wake up
and you say, today,
I'm going to go
get those things that my
creative mind has just
thought of.
And then you go out to
work and you come home
at the end of the day.
Guess what?
It didn't happen.
Didn't happen today.
I wanted to be successful.
I wanted to find a relationship.
It didn't happen.
And I was looking for it.
Explanation-- how
come I didn't find it?
And the answer is,
well, it's not me.
I'm the one that
had the great vision
of being happy and successful.
So it's not me.
The universe is
not supporting me.
I'm a victim.
I'm a victim, because
if I was in power,
I would have created
what I wanted.
And I got this crap instead.
I'm a victim.
I go, again, definition
of victim-- powerless.
It says, I have great
wishes and desires
what I want on this
planet, but I'm powerless.
I'm a victim.
Why-- every day I went out to
get it, and every day I go home
and it didn't get it.
I like to joke and say,
every day you go out there,
and you are shooting yourself
in the foot with a gun,
and you come home
limping, bloody foot,
and you are contemplating, who
the hell shot me in the foot?
And you don't even realize
the smoking gun is still
in your hand.
You've been shooting
yourself in the foot all day
because you've been
engaging programs
that you haven't been
paying attention to,
and these programs
undermined your life.
And so all of a sudden, we
buy the belief of victim.
I go, so why is it relevant?
Because if my life
is not working out,
it had nothing to do with me.
I wanted to be successful.
So then how come
it didn't work out?
I'm a victim.
And I say, end of line,
because the moment
you acknowledge you're a
victim, whether it's to genetics
or whatever you want, you're
acknowledging I have no power.
And we program the
population to have no power.
Well, it's kind of
interesting that some people
have a lot of power and
other people have no power.
And here's an exciting fact.
We're all equally powerful.
Well, then how come there
are people that are powerful
and I'm down here?
And the answer is simply this.
You have been programmed
not to have power,
because if I take
away your power,
I have the power and you don't.
So you start out everybody
equally powerful,
then you buy teachings, and
the teachings disempower you
every day, and the teacher is
getting more powerful every day.
Whether it's
religion or medicine,
we give up power and then
say that those people--
the doctor, the priest--
they're the powerful ones.
Listen to what they have to say.
And then you listen to what they
have to say and almost all of it
is, like, I'm sorry.
Your prognosis in this
life is not so good.
And you go, oh,
I'm a victim again.
And I love it because we go
back to the movie "The Matrix."
Yep, everybody got programmed.
But I said, what was
unique about the story?
Here's a red pill and
here's a blue pill.
Take the blue pill,
wake up tomorrow, life
is exactly the same way
that it's always been.
Take the red pill and you
get out of the program.
And I go, what would
be the consequence
of getting out of that program?
And now, science has
revealed the answer.
When people fall in love--
and it doesn't have to
be with another person,
but I use that in the model.
I can be in love with cooking--
a chef.
I can be in love with gardening.
I can be in love
with being an artist.
I say, what is the relevance?
When you're in love and doing
something, you're not thinking.
You're being present.
You just met this person after
30 years looking for somebody.
They're standing right
in front of your face.
Is this the time to let go of
reality and go inside and think?
The answer is, obviously not.
This is the time to-- oh,
my god, this person is here.
Let's have a good time.
And to get what--
in 24 hours, the blah, blah,
blah of 30 years disappears.
24 hours later,
oh, I'm so in love.
Life is so beautiful.
You know the food is better?
The music's great.
Even that crappy job
isn't so crappy anymore.
I go, wait, 24-hour
transformation from hell
on Earth to Heaven on Harth?
You stopped playing
the program, and that's
when you took over creativity
and you created what?
Heaven on Earth was what
you were looking for.
So I say, are you powerful?
I say, absolutely.
The moment you let
go of the program,
you can exercise creative mind.
That will be the guide that
determines my behavior, my life
experiences, and
my consequences.
But when I'm thinking,
I let all that go
and I just play the program.
And as mentioned up to
70% of those programs
are going to be disempowering
and self-sabotaging.
And that's why people are
struggling all over the place,
because we continue
the programming.
Genes control your
life, not you.
God controls your life.
You have nothing
to do with that.
But I'm in the middle here,
wearing my black suit.
I will connect you with God.
And then I go--
and when that control
ended, guess what?
The new control came in.
The guy in the
white suit says, I'm
between your health
and your life.
You need me.
And so we traded the white
and the black back and forth.
And it was like, both
those entities, they
thrive by you not
acknowledging your power,
because if you don't
have power, you
will buy whatever those
individuals have told you
because I am the victim.
And this is time for an
end, because the programs
we have been programmed with are
so self-destructive of not just
the individual, but of
nature, that we are now
trapped in a corner facing
our own extinction called
the sixth mass
extinction of life.
Five times, life thriving on
this planet, and some event
came and essentially
wiped out most of life.
The last time, 66
million years ago,
thriving, lush, tropical
forests, jungles and everything,
dinosaurs all over the place.
A comet hits the
Yucatan Peninsula,
upends the environment because
of the impact on the planet.
90% of life gets wiped out.
The dinosaurs disappear,
the whole thing.
And then it starts up again.
Well, that was the
fifth time that it ended
and then it had to restart.
And science today has revealed
the most important fact,
and that is we're in the
sixth mass extinction.
We're losing
species of organisms
faster than we've
ever lost them before.
I go, the planet is
having a problem?
I go, no.
Human behavior is now
attributed as the cause,
because human behavior
is undermining nature.
Thinking that
we're so damn smart
and we can tell nature
what to do, and it's like,
it doesn't work that way.
And one of the illustrations
that I would just
love for people to
see how visually it is
is Walt Disney's movie
called "Fantasia."
The story is, Mickey
Mouse is helping a master.
And the master has the book
of all those spells, potions,
and things like that.
The master leaves.
And Mickey has a little bit of
knowledge and looks at the book
and says, oh, I
can control my jobs
with-- like in today's world.
Hey, people, we'll make
machines do your jobs.
Well, he said,
oh, this one broom
that I can have it carry water
and fill up the water tank.
So he goes-- he
learned the magic,
how to make the
broom carry the water
and put it into the water tank.
And he falls asleep.
And what happened was, the
broom kept filling up the water,
filling it up.
And there was a point where
the water is now overflowing.
Now, the water is
all over the lab.
And he wakes up in shock.
He's like, oh, my god, the
thing is flooded in here.
So what does he want to do?
Wants to stop the broom.
Well, he never learned
how to stop the broom.
So he gets an axe,
hits the broom,
but breaks it, now,
into two brooms.
So now there are two
brooms carrying water,
and then another hit, and
then there's more brooms.
And at some point, it's way
the hell out of control.
And then at the very
end, the master comes in,
sees this big mess
completes his magic
as he knows, stops the mess.
And somewhere along the line,
the narrator said, it's like,
what happens with a little bit
of knowledge is very dangerous.
And Mickey's little
bit of knowledge
allowed him to get the
brooms, the technology,
to carry the water, but not
enough knowledge to control it.
And I go-- coincidence.
Science today is
Mickey Mousing around
with our biology with not
enough conventional knowledge
to understand what
they're doing.
And I go, well,
what's the result?
And I say, planet is
engulfed with health crisis--
every country.
People are sick.
Cancer goes up.
Cardiovascular disease,
Alzheimer's, diabetes,
all on the rise in a world
where massive amounts of money
are put into that.
And I go, what's the problem.
I said, well, you're investing
in the wrong mechanism?
Health isn't coming from
that pharmaceutical pill.
Health is coming from
the consciousness.
If you give up and say the
pharmaceutical pill did it,
you believe in the pill, well,
that's the placebo effect.
Oh, the pill healed me.
No, it was a sugar pill.
Oh.
Your belief in the
pill healed you.
>> So they need to
change the cards.
>> No!
>> Yeah.
[LAUGHTER]
>> This is scene 2, take 2.
Marker.
>> So-- we're set?
OK.
Let's talk a little
bit about the history.
You've brought up
frontier science
and conventional science.
You've brought up
Darwin, Newton.
I would love for people to
get a grasp on where science
used to be, where it
is today, maybe how
it came to be that way.
What kind of got in the way?
Because it seems
like it's really
steered our belief system.
>> Absolutely.
Yeah.
OK?
>> Yeah.
I can do question by question,
or you can take it away.
>> Well, probably just
try and take it away.
OK.
The idea that knowledge is
power is not a new concept.
That's been in human
history for millennia.
And the significance
is that science came in
to understand the nature
of how life works.
But when science came
back in the 1500s--
and 1543 is actually the date
of what we call the Scientific
Revolution, because that's
the day that Copernicus died.
And you go, who's Copernicus?
I go, at the time,
what was happening
was that the Church
was losing its flock.
They were going out because they
sort of lost interest in it.
And Martin Luther
was also involved,
giving other people ideas
other than what was coming
the dogma from the Church.
And the Church started
losing attendance
in this period of
the Reformation.
But they had a
mission statement.
They wanted to bring
the people back in.
And so they thought
to themselves, well,
people show up at
the church when?
Holidays.
Holidays, festivals.
That's when they show up.
But the problem was, in
the calendar at the time,
there are two versions of dates.
One is called sidereal,
which means every year,
on the same day,
same thing happens.
Christmas-- every year, December
25, for a couple thousand years.
But other events are
linked to the moon
cycle, which is 28 days.
So why is it relevant?
Because 28 days doesn't
go into 365 evenly.
So all of a sudden, it says then
the two calendars of an event
based on the moon
cycle does not line up
with events based
on the solar cycle.
So they were lost because
Easter versus Christmas is not
on the same day every year.
And the Church wanted to
coordinate its activities,
had to say, well, how will we
know what day Easter is on?
Well, they didn't know.
And they entertained
the idea of, well,
maybe this guy
Copernicus, who was
a priest, but also an
astronomer and a medical doctor,
would help them.
So they went to Copernicus and
said, we have this problem.
We want to coordinate the
dates of the festivals,
but they don't line up.
So Copernicus goes
back to his lab.
And the first thing is this.
At that time, the
Bible was the provider
of truth, the purveyor of truth.
And in the Bible, it
said that the Earth is
the center of God's universe.
So he figured, well, if I
study the planets moving
around the Earth, I'll
be able to get the dates.
He was never able to do that,
putting the Earth in a center
and having everything,
including the sun, go around.
But he went back to--
I think it was Ptolemy
in ancient Egypt
who came up with the idea
that the sun was the center
and that the Earth
revolves around the sun.
And he said he said, well,
let me try that data.
He puts the data,
and lo and behold,
he's able to accurately
predict Easter and Christmas
because he's incorporated, now,
the moon cycle and the sun cycle
and puts it together.
So he goes back to the
leaders of the Church
and he says, I got it.
And they say, OK,
Copernicus, tell us.
What happened?
He says, see how I did this?
You got all the
dates right here.
And they said, but
how did you do that?
And this is where Copernicus
comes in and goes,
I had to make one slight change.
And they go, what?
They said, well, the Earth is
not the center of the universe
as it says in the Bible.
The sun would be the center.
And all of a sudden,
all the priests
were like, oh, my
god, heresy, heresy!
But then the result was, he
was able to do the prediction.
So now, the Church is in a bind.
He's they're able to use his
data, but they use his data,
it compromises the Bible.
So they made a deal.
Copernicus, don't ever tell
anybody how you got this data
and we'll let you stay alive,
because otherwise, you'd
be a heretic and we'd have
to burn you at the stake.
So here's Copernicus with
a secret that completely
undoes the idea of the Church
and their power of knowledge--
infallible knowledge.
Well, it's kind
of fallible here.
And once you open
up that thing, it's
like opening up Pandora's box.
Everybody will start to look,
where else is infallible?
So they ensured that
Copernicus would never
tell anybody how he got the
results because it was heresy.
And here's a guy.
Imagine you had this secret that
could change the entire world
and you can't talk about it
because they'll kill you.
So what does he do?
He waits and he waits.
And on his deathbed,
he releases a book.
Here, the science
is in the book.
I'm going to die.
You can't use me as your excuse.
You're going to be
left with the book.
And he died in
1543 on that date.
And his death is marked as
the foundation or the birth
of the modern
Scientific Revolution,
because basically, he
said to the Church, well,
your Bible is wrong.
Here's the right answer.
You can't kill me.
I'm gone.
Deal with the answer.
And that's one of the
things that broke the power
structure of the Church.
And they didn't kill him
because he died naturally.
But it's interesting-- one of
his followers not that long
after, Bruno--
I can't remember his last name.
Bruno, a priest, started
teaching Copernicus' stuff.
Now, the church wasn't
going to tolerate it now.
So what they did is they
took Bruno Giordano,
I think something like that.
They took him, stripped him of
his clothes, tied him to a log,
carried him through town, and
then burned him at the stake.
For what?
For repeating the
words of Copernicus.
And then it goes
well, then, guess who
was the next guy who did that?
Galileo.
And they couldn't kill Galileo.
He was wholly recognized as an
important person in the world.
They couldn't kill
him, so they just
put him under house arrest
for the rest of his life
so he couldn't leave his house.
And that's how they
punished Galileo
for Copernicus and stuff.
And so essentially,
what they did
was just push everything
down that suggested
that they might be wrong.
But then Darwin comes
along at some point
and challenges the whole
foundation of Genesis.
And at that moment--
because people were quite aware.
No computers and things to
play in your mind other than,
what did they use for
entertainment in those days?
A lot of it was breeding
animals and plants.
So people like Darwin
raised pigeons.
People raised other
animals and other plants.
And what did they know?
Just as Darwin said, you
mate two parents together,
they mate, the
offspring comes out.
Let's say a litter
of six puppies.
Five of them are
healthy puppies.
One is a runt of the litter.
And the story goes is, well,
what if you took the runts
and made it in with other runts?
You get a lineage of runts.
Well, the whole idea
is, they took that idea
and said that the runt lineage
will lead to a new species.
And all of a sudden,
everybody's familiarity
with breeding plants
and animals totally
made sense with that
description that Darwin offered.
Instead of the idea of a magical
seven days of manifestation,
it was like, oh, it's breeding,
alterations of genetics,
which they didn't
know about, heredity.
But it was alterations
that gave rise
to this whole ecosphere of
all these different organisms.
So that's when the
Church lost the power,
because the public at that point
said, no, Genesis, probably not.
Breeding of animals
and plants, we've
seen that and seen it work.
So the Church lost its power.
Science took over
because people no longer
trusted the so-called
truth of the Church.
But now, today, still,
we take science as truth.
Unfortunately, in today's
political situation,
even science is getting
knocked as not being right
for the benefit of some
people to take power.
And yet, no, science
is pretty darn correct
if you don't have a bias.
Science is not supposed to have
a bias, but money makes bias.
And we're being
given information
that's not scientifically
accurate anymore to give power
to other entities, such as
the pharmaceutical industry.
I don't think I even
answered your question.
>> Well, you did.
You went into--
>> Anybody know what
the question was?
No?
OK, there was something there.
>> You have said that quantum
physics is the most valid
science on the planet.
>> What is it?
>> Quantum physics, you said--
>> Is the most valid science.
>> --is the most valid
science on the planet.
>> Yeah.
>> And you can argue against
people saying that it is not
valid.
[LAUGHTER]
Besides Trump, who said that?
No, unfortunately, in
the world of science,
it's very, very clear,
understanding that quantum
physics, not just an
idea, but validated year
after year, all the observations
and the prognostications
have been validated
beyond any other science.
So basically comes down
to an interesting part.
If I'm going to
question a science,
the last quiet type of
science I would question
would be physics--
quantum physics--
because it is now
so truthful compared
to every other science
that the other ones
don't even match up.
So quantum physics
changes the whole game,
because Newtonian physics
separated the universe
into matter and energy.
And in the process, this is
how Newton avoided the Church.
Allowed him to do research and
avoided the power of the Church
at that time by what?
He said, matter and energy.
The body is made out
of matter and it only
is affected by matter.
Energy is a different realm.
And that's the invisible realm.
So he divided the universe
into physics and metaphysics.
Physics, the mechanical
reality of what we do, physics.
Metaphysics is the
invisible energy
that they had no recognition
of, but they said
the Church has the metaphysics.
Church has the idea
of spirituality.
There was no connection
According to Newton, you
could understand the universe
without invoking any
invisible forces,
because when he understood
the nature of how
the planets moved--
and most people are so
unaware of, well, yeah,
Newtonian physics came from.
It is like, he first
had to create calculus.
And nobody mentions that.
It's like, well, that's not
a little-- like, oh, hey,
on Monday, I created calculus.
I go, calculus?
He had to create that because
it's the mathematics of moving
things.
And so he created
calculus equations,
put the data about
the solar system--
physical data, size of a
planet, mass of the planet,
the speed of the planet,
the vector of the orbit,
put that data in,
solved the equation,
and predicts the movement of
the planets in the solar system.
Relevance is very
clear for science.
Science is based on prediction.
If I can tell you what's
going to happen in the future
and it does, then
somewhere along the line,
I have some insight
into, there's
a mechanism, and understanding
that mechanism gives you
that result. So science is
predicated on prediction.
Newton's science, he predicted
the movements of the universe
without God, spirit,
or invisible forces.
And I say, what's the result?
Well, Newton's understanding
of the material world
is you don't need to invoke
invisible things like spirit.
You could just study
the physical plane.
So he said, OK,
science, we're going
to study the physical
plane, but we're
going to leave all
that spiritual stuff
to you, the Church.
And that allowed science
to operate independently
of the Church.
But it made a schism
in the universe.
Said it's made out of two
things, matter and energy.
And atoms were supposed to be
the smallest part of matter.
And by 1895, they started
to find, wait, there's
smaller things in the atom.
There's a nucleus, the
electrons and protons.
And by 1927, which is the actual
date of quantum physics becoming
"the" science,
people started to see
there was something even
smaller inside the atom.
And now, what are
we talking about?
Things like quarks and
photons and stuff like that.
And I go, what's relevant?
Well, we attribute protons,
neutrons, electrons
to being physical particles.
They're made out of
invisible energy.
So wait a minute.
Everything comes from energy.
The source is energy.
Quantum physics
recognizes this changes
the duality of the
universe, matter and energy,
into a singularity.
It's all energy.
Everything is energy.
And this is why quantum
physics is important in regard
to its emphasis.
And I go, so why
is this relevant?
I'll give a quote
from Albert Einstein.
We talk about the energy
around us as being a field.
We're all in a field right now.
I mean, as I'm sitting here,
television broadcasts, cell
phone broadcasts, solar
energy, it's all happening,
invisible fields.
I'm in it.
Now, here's the quote.
If you get it, it's
like, the world changes.
From Einstein.
"The field is the soul
governing agency of matter."
So that matter as we see it
didn't just come by itself.
It came from a field
shaping matter.
Give very simple explanation.
I take a piece of iron,
I file, I file it down.
Get a pile of iron dust,
called iron filings.
Put it in a salt shaker.
Piece of paper.
Sprinkle the iron
filings on the paper.
And guess what?
I get a random pile of iron
filings every time I do it.
Random pile.
And I say, oh, before
you do it next time,
put a magnet underneath
the piece of paper.
I say, why?
Because a magnet has
an invisible energy
field, the magnetic field.
I say, so what?
I put the magnet
under the paper.
I sprinkle the iron filings.
And now, it's not
a random pattern.
Now, it's the beautiful,
elaborate pattern
of an electromagnetic field.
The particles show
the whole field.
And so there's a structure.
Every time I throw away those
filings, sprinkle again,
the field gave shape
to the particles.
When there was no
magnetic field--
particles random, that's
all it was, put a field in,
particles precisely
going to a pattern.
Focus.
The field is the soul governing
agency of those particles.
And all of a sudden,
it says, yeah,
but what level does this cover?
I said, every level
of the structure
of the energy in the universe.
I go, so fields of
energy shape us?
I go, yes.
And now all of a sudden,
I say, yeah, but thought
is not manifest as a particle.
Thought is an energy field.
And so your thoughts generate
a field that your particles--
cells, not iron filings--
your particles assemble
to complement the field.
If you change your
perception of the field,
you change your biology.
If you have a
misperception of the field,
you've misorganized or
misstructured your biology.
And all of a sudden, I
say, so why is it relevant?
The idea that a human body is
just a physical thing affected
by physical things like
pharmaceutical drugs
is an illusion.
The illusion of reality--
I love it because
Einstein, again,
obviously one of my
heroes, Einstein writes,
"Reality is an illusion,
albeit a persistent one."
The simple point is what?
The material expression
of the universe
is an illusion because there
is no physical structure
in the universe.
It's all energy.
And wow, there's
a characteristic.
What's energy?
Well, it's in waves.
And I know that from
experimental studies,
that invisible force field--
drop a rock into the pond,
the energy of the falling rock
transmitted into the water
shapes the water in
the shape of the field.
So the ripples are an
expression of an energy field.
One.
Number two, it's invisible.
Now, we've got a problem.
If energy is invisible, then
how the heck can I see you?
And comes an answer--
sounds like a joke.
Way profound answer is this.
The only reason you can see me
is because the lights are on.
It's like-- I go,
the reason is this.
My body is an energy field.
It's not physical.
But photons of light
coming from a light source
hit my energy field, and
the energy of the photon
is deflected by the energy of
the body and deflected back.
You're not seeing me.
You're seeing a
veneer of photons
that are hitting the surface
of me and bouncing back.
I go, so you mean
there's nothing--
no structure underneath?
I go, these are what
the scan technologies--
MRI, CAT scans, all
these kinds of scans.
So why is it relevant?
I said, they don't read light.
They could see your structure
by looking through your body.
I go, well, then, how can
they see my structure?
Because it doesn't
measure light.
It measures
electromagnetic fields.
So when you see the structure
in a CAT scan of a human body,
oh, yeah, there's
vertebrae, and lungs,
and I can see all
this kind of thing.
I go, but what you're
seeing is an energy profile,
because CAT scans
don't read light.
They read energy.
So what does the
human body look like?
I say, look at an MRI.
That's what you are.
And I say, yeah, but it's all
this-- it's like an X-ray,
because everything is energy.
You can see through it.
I go, yeah.
But if you hit the photons
of light on the surface,
it'll bounce back, so you
see a reflection of light.
But you do not see my
body, because it's not
made out of matter.
And I go, then everything that
you see is made out of matter?
So that there is no physical
element to the universe,
because everything you perceive
as matter made out of atoms,
and atoms are built
out of energy,
not matter, then you're looking
at an expression of energy.
And I say, why is it relevant?
Because as conventional
science would say,
that chemistry affects the body
because the body is physical
and energy doesn't.
That's why we
ignore consciousness
and all that stuff.
Then you say, well,
the body can only
be affected by something
that is mechanical to affect
a mechanical body.
And then you go, but wait,
the body isn't mechanical.
The body is energy.
I say, so why?
I said, because energy
affects energy--
more effective than
chemicals affect energy.
And so there was a
study in London saying,
well, the body does
respond to physical drugs,
but it also apparently
responds to energy,
because energy healing was here
hundreds of thousands of years
before medical school was here.
They didn't take pills.
They did hands-on
healing, energy.
And so McClare,
researcher in physics
in the University of London,
asked a basic question.
If I'm sending a signal--
and it could be a drug, a
physical/chemical appearing
signal, or it could be just
a vibrational energy field.
Is there a difference
in the effectiveness?
And the answer turns out
the energy signal is 100%--
OK, 99-- 99% more efficient in
sending a signal than is a drug.
So I said, well, if
you're giving me a choice,
take a healing thing,
you give me a drug
or you give me a
vibrational energy,
the energy is nearly 100
times more efficient.
Why would I take the damn drug?
And that's where the
problem comes in,
because if you're a
pharmaceutical company,
you can't sell energy.
There's no, here's
your energy tablet.
It's invisible.
Just take it.
It's like, no, you can
only sell physical drugs.
So I say, then what
would be the consequence
and I'm saying this
from a former researcher
in a university in
a medical school?
I'm saying this because
the medical system has
been manipulated by the
pharmaceutical people
to ignore the invisible
realm and to push drugs.
Now, the medical
doctors are just
taking whatever the heck
was said in medical school--
because I was a professor.
I know this.
Whatever my words are, that
becomes concrete belief.
And when we stop--
well, we didn't start,
even-- teaching about
energy in medicine
until more recently.
And it's interesting, because I
talk about the CAT scans reading
energy, the CAT scans weren't
created by medical people.
They were created by physicists.
I say, so where's the
medical people come in?
They go, oh, my god, with
this scanning device,
I can get a map of the body.
And so if you take a breast
scan with an energy device,
you can see a tumor.
I go, why?
Because tumor cells
have a different energy
than normal cells.
So if I'm reading
an energy field,
the tumor cells will stand
out as a different expression
than the normal cells.
So when a conventional
physician looks at the scan,
breast scan says
there's a tumor.
Their interest is,
give me a scalpel.
I know exactly where
to find that damn tumor
and I'll cut it out.
I go, well, yeah, that's
what we've been used to.
I said, well, what does
quantum physics say?
You don't have to--
energy shapes matter.
If I put in a different
energy, I can change the shape.
Hands-on healing is putting
energy into a system.
I go, so what does it mean?
I said, I can adjust
your health with energy.
And I go, wow, this is not in
favor with the pharmaceutical
industry because they
cannot sell energy.
So what do they do?
Put all their money into
restricting the nature of energy
in medical school and
emphasizing the role of drugs
as the resource of healing.
And I go, but energy is
100 times more efficient.
Yeah, but I'm sorry, as
a pharmaceutical person,
I can't sell you an energy.
I need to sell you
something physical.
And that's why if they
just sold placebos--
here's something physical.
It's a sugar pill.
If you didn't tell
them it was a sugar
pill, that pill in
their consciousness,
which is not physical
energy, the consciousness--
will change the
health of the body
through changing
the consciousness,
not by the pill changing
the physicality.
And this becomes
so important for us
because of connections
to things like, well,
what is spirituality?
OK, definition.
You ready?
Field.
The energy that I talk about--
invisible moving forces that
influence the physical world.
Definition of field.
I go, what's the
definition of spirit?
Invisible moving forces that
influence the physical world.
They go, oh, my god, quantum
physics and spirituality
have the same conclusion.
And the reality is this.
And it's interesting, because
Tesla was the scientist who
saw this way ahead.
And he said, the
moment medicine starts
to focus on the energy
field, in a very short time,
will change all of
the history that we
have in just a very short time.
So I'm presuming this
is an opportunity
to help change history
here, because people
need to know their thoughts are
not just things that fly off.
Their thoughts are translated
into chemistry by the brain,
and the chemistry is
released into the blood,
and the blood is
the environment that
shapes behavior and genetics.
Change the chemistry, you
change the fate of the cells.
I go, wow, that's exactly the
results I had 50 years ago
when I put genetically identical
cells in different Petri dishes.
All dishes have genetically
identical cells.
I changed the composition of the
culture medium, the nutrients
in which cells grow.
What is culture medium?
Laboratory version of blood.
I grow human cells.
What's blood made
out of in human?
Go into the lab, mix it
all up, feed the cells,
the same thing that blood had.
But since I was in
the lab, I could
change some of
the composition, I
made three slightly different
versions of culture medium
with slightly
different chemistry.
Genetically identical cells.
In dish 1, environment
1, culture medium 1,
the cells form muscle.
Dish 2, culture medium
2, the cells form bone.
Dish 3, put in a culture medium
again with a slightly different
combination, the
cells form fat cells.
I go, then, what controlled
the fate of the cells?
The answer was, they were
all genetically the same.
It was the environment
that was different.
And that's what I saw
over 50 years ago.
While I was teaching,
genes control life.
I go in the lab and
go, that's not true.
Genes didn't control this.
This is controlled
by environment.
Well, for 20 to 25 years,
people ignored my study
because everyone was
so focused on genes
that this was taking us away.
But 1990, science
fully recognized
the conventional story of genes
turning on and off controlling
life is totally false.
Genes do not turn on and off.
Genes are blueprints.
And that the consciousness,
as the contractor,
can take all your blueprints
and read them just the way
they are or modify them to
thousands of different versions
and create something new
and different out of it.
And we're pretty good
at creating cancer,
heart disease, diabetes.
We're creating those.
They didn't come from
our genetic problems.
They came from our
belief, thought, energy,
field, shaping matter.
And all of a sudden,
it says, you're
not a victim of your genes.
If anything, you're a
victim of whatever image
you're sending in.
And then power comes from what?
Take the red pill.
Stop thinking.
That's why two
people come together,
the moment they stop thinking
as a couple is the moment
they start creating--
from conscious mind, which
is normally thinking.
But if I keep it
present, be mindful,
then conscious mind is directing
my life and not the programs.
And all of a sudden, you
said, oh, my god, you
mean, as soon as I stop playing
the program, 24 hours later,
I had Heaven on Earth?
I go, Heaven on
Earth is always here.
It's your issue of whether
you want to see it that way,
or are you still stuck
in your program ?
Because program means no
matter how many times you
push that button, the
behavior is always
going to be the same until
you change the program.
>> Fortunately, I think people
are starting to get that.
You're describing epigenetics?
>> Well, I just did.
>> Right.
But you didn't put
a name to it, so I--
>> Oh, OK.
I'll just sentence,
you can figure it out.
OK.
Well, the relevance, then, of
understanding how consciousness
took over the control of genes
is the source from above,
consciousness, is shaping
the matter, epigenetics.
Control above the genes.
And this is where thought
becomes the manifestor
of our life expression.
>> Nice.
Nice.
>> Even that excerpt
was too long.
Not my problem.
OK.
>> You talk about the
significance of water and also
fractal geometry.
>> Oh god, yeah.
>> Oh, I'd love
to hear about it.
>> There's a wonderful
mathematics called geometry.
And geometry is the math of
putting structure into space.
And that's why when
we were in school,
we took a form of
geometry that's
called Euclidean geometry.
And if you go back,
remember, that
was the math that you had a
protractor and the triangles
and all those things.
And what were you doing
on the graph paper?
You were putting structures,
cubes, spheres, pyramids,
triangles, the characters
of Euclidean geometry.
And you could put
them on a page.
And this is how we
create a building.
This is based on that
kind of geometry.
And I go, well,
this is really cool.
Euclidean geometry designs
our machines, our buildings,
the structures we make.
I go, but does
Euclidean geometry
create a tree, a snail, a fern?
I say, well, how would I know?
I said, well, you
can plot all the heck
you want with all your equations
and Euclidean geometry.
You're still going to get small
squares, cubes, triangles,
spheres, cones.
But it doesn't really
reflect nature.
So back at the turn--
I think it was at the end of
the 1800s, going into the 1900s.
A French mathematician
came up with the idea of,
what is a fractal?
Now, in geometry, you have all
those different damn equations.
Fractals are interesting because
it uses a single equation
and repeats it.
And I say, how?
I say, here's a single equation.
Solve it.
You got an answer.
Now what?
I say, take that answer, put
it back into the equation,
solve it again.
Get a different answer.
Put that one back in the
equation and solve it again.
It's called
iteration, repetition.
I go, so why is that relevant?
Because it keeps repeating
itself over and over again.
But it builds a big structure.
I go, so what's the relevance?
I say, the big structure is
the same as the small structure
you started with.
And so fractals have
iteration repeat.
And if you can get the
basic understanding
of a fractal image,
you can repeat that
over and over and over again
and get something very massive
out of it.
And I go, the thing
that happened--
and that was in the '80s, a
scientist, Benoit, at IBM,
had access to computers
and said, well,
why did he need computers?
The answer is this.
From the very beginning, he
said, I have that equation
and I get it and solve
it and repeat it again.
But to put a picture on a piece
of paper-- graph paper-- of what
that represented
would take maybe
a million or more calculations.
So if I said, OK, I'm
Bruce Mathematician.
I'm going to sit
down today and I'm
going to show you what
the picture of what
this fractal looks like.
And I-- once, put the dot
down, solve it again twice,
put the dot down on the
paper, solve it again,
put the dot down.
I say, after a million
dots, an image will show up.
And I go, and how long does it
take to compute and calculate
a million times?
I go, years.
And so the earliest people
that had an idea of fractals
never could see a
fractal because they
didn't have years to sit still
and repeat the same thing over
and over again to
millions of times.
But Benoit Mandelbrot,
in the 1980s,
had supercomputers
at that time from IBM
and was the first guy to stick
the equation into computer.
And when he saw the printout,
he's like, oh, my god,
these are living structures.
The images that came out
of solving fractal geometry
equations created structures
that represented life.
You can see a picture of a
fern in a fractal geometry
and not distinguish it from
a photograph of a real fern.
You can make a mountain
with clouds on it
with mathematical equations.
And all of a
sudden, it says, oh,
nature is not built
on Euclidean geometry.
It's built on fractal geometry,
because when you solve it,
they create nature
images instead
of cubes and spheres and cones.
And so what, again, is
the relevance of that?
And the relevance is--
and here it is.
Because you use
the same equation
and repeat it over
and over again,
then there's a basic structure
that evolves from that equation,
but is repeated
over and over again
at higher and higher
magnification.
And so it says, well, if you
want to understand a human,
do I have to understand
the whole human?
I go, a cell is a
fractal of a human.
Why?
You look at and say, it doesn't
look exactly like a human.
I said, well, it really does,
if you put the pseudopods
out-- the arms and the legs
and the body of the cell.
And I go so what?
I said, this is why, if
we study cell biology,
the mechanisms of
cell biology are
a fractal image of the
mechanisms of the whole biology.
I don't have to study
the whole human.
Just study the cell.
The patterns are the same.
Conclusion-- and
this is the one--
the concept of "as above, so
below" it's not a suggestion.
It is a principle
of fractal geometry.
If you want to understand
how a body works,
you don't have to
study the whole body.
Study its cell, because it is
the same image at a smaller
version.
You want to study what
happens to humans?
We are cells in the
bigger population
of all the other cells.
And so the function of the
cell, the function of the human,
the function of
human civilization,
communities, all have
the same foundation.
As above, so below.
So that the future
of evolution could
be understood by looking
the past of evolution.
And that future reveals
we're on the threshold
of a brand-new
world, because we're
going to see where the
patterns play themselves out.
And it really comes down
to a very interesting fact.
If we look at the evolution of
vertebrates-- fish, amphibians,
reptiles, birds,
mammals-- we see a jumping
from one kind of organization
to the next to the next.
And I say, well, then, the human
evolution, human civilization
as a multicellular organism,
would, by fractal geometry,
replicate the
previous evolution.
So I go, yeah, humans have
been through those levels
of vertebrate evolution.
Fish society was
called mariculture.
They were the first cultures.
They lived at the water, lived
off the proceeds from the water,
couldn't go into the land
because they needed the water,
so they couldn't just
go out into the land.
So the first cultures
of humans were
living on the edges of
continents, using the water,
and also connecting via water
to all the other land sources.
Then I say, well, what happened?
That was called the fish phase.
Then I say, but fish
gave rise to amphibians.
Say, what did they do?
They carried the water with them
when they got out of the water
so they could be on land.
A tadpole starts as a
swimming, like, fish organism
in the water.
But when it turns
into a frog, it
doesn't have to
live in the water.
It carries the water
with it in its body.
So this allowed the next phase.
You don't have to live where
the water is at the edge.
Find the water inside--
agriculture.
No longer restricted
to the edge.
You could create food using the
water that you carry with you,
or you can get viaducts, or
even learn how to make wells.
And all of a sudden, you're
not restricted to the front.
So we went from fish society
to amphibian society,
from mariculture to agriculture.
And the next level of
evolution was reptiles.
I go, what was
unique about them?
They didn't start in the water.
They were expressly designed
to start on the land,
live on the land.
And they were technically
almost digital.
I mean, their movements, if you
see them, like their heads--
click.
Eyes blink.
It's a mechanism.
And I go, yeah, it's a machine.
A reptile is a machine.
I go, so what was relevant?
I said, well, it started out
as a little five-inch little
reptile.
But, well, you can
make a bigger one.
What?
A dinosaur-- 50-foot
instead of 5-inch.
I say, guess what?
Take the blueprint
of the 5-inch lizard,
you can blow it up
to a 50-foot lizard.
Same thing.
When I was a kid, before
Spielberg and all that stuff,
there was a great movie--
it was something like
"50,000 BC," Victor Mature.
Some old-- nobody knows
who that guy is now.
But they made dinosaur
movies of caveman.
I said, how did they
make these dinosaurs?
They used macro
photography of lizards
and blew them up in the field
as if they were dinosaurs.
And they look exactly
like dinosaurs
behaved, like dinosaurs.
Why?
Because a lizard is the
prototype of a 50-foot dinosaur.
And I say, where does
that relate to in humans?
I go, industrial civilization
is the mechanized version
of human civilization.
And it started out as
small little things.
As what?
Mom and pop shops.
But then, what?
As they became successful,
they grew bigger and bigger.
And they became
dinosaurs of industry.
And I go, there's
only one problem
that happened in that
evolution, and that was this.
Well, the body got bigger
and bigger and bigger.
The brain stayed
pitifully small.
Why?
Because there was a machine.
I could make-- the movement
of a lizard's foot.
Let's say 10 muscles cause the
leg of this lizard to move this.
And then I go-- we're done?
>> Sorry, the card stopped.
>> Take 3.
Marker.
>> OK, you ready?
>> Ready, yeah.
>> So what was I going to say?
OK.
So a small, five-inch lizard
is the physical prototype
of a 50-foot lizard.
So I say, so for example, if we
go to the drawing board of what
a five-inch lizard
looks like, I said,
this lizard has a leg
that moves in this--
and I say, how does it move?
I say, well, there
are 10 muscles.
And one nerve fires
those 10 muscles,
and that makes its movement.
Like, what about a
50-foot dinosaur?
Same pattern, same movement.
But instead of 10
muscles, 10,000 muscles.
And I go and how many
nerves necessary?
I go, one.
So as the mass of
the body got bigger,
the necessity of making
the nervous system bigger
wasn't necessary,
because it was still
the same behavior, whether it's
10 muscles or 10,000 muscles.
So the machines grew from
little, small machines
to giant dinosaurs.
Our fractal image of that is
we start with small mom and pop
businesses, which, as
they got successful,
grew into large industries.
So in today's reptilian
version, there's
this large industries
that manipulate
everything that's going on.
And little sidebar-- we
also talk about the fact
that oil, which
is the energizing
factor of our civilization,
is referred to as
the blood of the dinosaur.
Ha!
So I say, then what?
I say, OK, let's
go beyond dinosaurs
and say, what did
they give rise to?
And I said, airplanes,
flight, birds.
I say, oh, yeah, the Industrial
Revolution created machines
that put into a flight
mechanism, let Wilbur
and Orville Wright fly.
So the next level of
evolution went from--
reptilian evolution
is still here,
but a branch is now called
aeronautics, flying.
I go, and what was
the evolution of that?
And I go, 1969, the
plane lands on the moon.
And I say, then what happened?
And here comes the
part that is amazing.
It precipitates evolution.
I say, how?
Because they took a picture
of the Earth from the moon,
and for the first time
in human consciousness,
people saw, oh, my god,
that little blue green thing
is all alone by itself in space,
and all of a sudden the idea of,
we have to take care of this.
So in 1969, the picture
shows up in the news.
People see this.
Guess what was created?
Earth Day.
I said, what was that all about?
To recognize that if
that's all we have,
we have to take care of it.
Take care of the air,
take care of the water,
take care of the soil,
take care of the people.
And I say take care
is called nurture.
And it turns out that
mammals, by definition,
are called nurturers.
So in 1969, a new
organism was created--
mammals.
But they had no jobs.
So people that were the students
and all that, they had a vision,
but they were not capable, at
that young age, to manifest.
So they were still--
the young mammals were
stepped on by the dinosaurs.
And I go, well, that happened.
And yet what's happening now
is industrial civilization,
which is precipitating the
mass extinction that we're
in because of their
dishonoring of the environment
and of people--
is collapsing just like
the dinosaurs collapsed.
And I said, what happened
when the dinosaurs collapsed?
The mammals rose up
and nurturers took
over the planet, the mammals.
I said, where are we?
We're at the fall of the
reptiles and the loss of oil--
blood-- and the mammals,
who are now older,
are in positions of control.
And so there is a
movement to change the way
we have been living from
the reptilian version
to the mammalian version.
So the reptilian is coming--
collapsing.
The mammals are evolving
at the same time.
And where are we today?
You look out the window and
all you see is collapse.
And I go, well, if
that's what you focus on,
that's the problem.
Because you could focus
on the ones coming down,
tie up your energy,
live in fear,
have all those problems, or--
choice-- look at the
one that's being built.
See where we're going.
See where the new ideas, the new
technology, all of that stuff
is coming in, because that is
the nurturing technology that
will allow us to survive
the mass extinction we
have precipitated with
our reptilian thinking.
The new civilization is
a mammalian, nurturing
civilization.
And that will be
the fractal pattern.
And so it's interesting
because, as I said,
you can tell the past, but
you can predict the future.
And I say, what's the future?
If we succeed-- and it's
no guarantee we will--
then mammals will replace
the destructive character
of the reptiles, the industry
people, the small percent that
are controlling the rest.
And the evolution
says, what happens
if we all become mammals?
The answer is, that nurtures the
garden, the one we destroyed.
And so a fractal image is
telling us there is a future.
If you follow through on
it, it's going to be great.
Must we follow through on it?
Well, no.
Other civilizations
have been here
and disappeared in the past.
Why?
They never
successfully completed
the last stage of that.
They collapsed.
Whether it's Atlantis,
Lemuria, or wherever one
you find from ancient history--
that is not in our
history actually,
because, those
civilizations existed
before our modern history--
the relevance is what?
We are in the same position.
Are we going to make
it as a civilization?
At this very moment, 50/50.
I have no idea.
We have the potential, but we
may not realize our potential.
>> Do you think that AI,
artificial intelligence,
is in that path?
>> It is, to a certain extent,
if we understand what it's to be
used for.
And the answer is this.
Right now, we've been programmed
with the cultural beliefs
that we are the workers that
empower what's going on,
and you go out
there and you do all
this mechanical, physical work.
And you get a reward.
You get a paycheck.
And some people just
scrape by with enough
of a reward to survive.
Other people
accumulate some money
and can do things
with it like that.
And so the issue is, is
artificial intelligence
going to replace humans?
And the answer-- that would
be one of the stupidest
ideas in the universe.
I say, why?
Because if I say, then why
are we here at this time?
And the answer is
because we are creators.
We can create the mess we've
done, which we've done.
But as we know from
the honeymoon effect,
we can manifest Heaven on Earth.
Do I want to turn over the joy
and love and happiness of heaven
on earth and let a
machine experience it?
Hell no.
What the hell do I
care about the machine?
It's me.
So when we focus on AI, you
take yourself out of the picture
and then all of a sudden,
you see a machine world.
People are part machines.
It's like, man, you
missed the story.
We're the creators.
You don't replace the
creator with a machine.
The creator does what?
If the machines
support us, it gives me
more free, creative
opportunities.
So I look to AI as to enhance
my experience of Heaven
on Earth, not to replace my
experience of Heaven on Earth.
And that's where AI's
got the whole idea wrong.
What value would humans have?
Oh, the machine will do it all.
So then what the heck
are you going to do?
And the point is, we
are here for a reason.
We don't have to be here.
We've been lost nearly--
all organisms have been lost
nearly five times in history
through mass extinctions.
But we're still here.
And the idea is there
was a mission statement.
And the mission statement,
when realized by humans,
is experiencing what is
called Heaven on Earth.
And it's beautiful
because there's no one
definition of Heaven on Earth.
You can ask 10 people
their definitions.
You're going to
get 10 definitions.
So the conclusion is, it's
not just heaven on earth.
It's what you want.
If I say to you, tell me
your vision of Heaven,
it will be your interpretation,
based on your life experiences,
because that's what you can
draw from, of how would you
like to put those
experiences in a situation
where you will enjoy them?
And different people have
different experiences.
It's not all the same.
Like, if someone
was talking about--
you ask a hunter,
what is Heaven?
And that hunter says, oh, I
go out every day duck hunting
in the morning.
I go out in the boat and I
shoot ducks all day long.
I go, oh, so your heaven
is shooting ducks,
so I guess your heaven is
hell for ducks, isn't it?
[LAUGHTER] I don't want to
be a duck in your Heaven.
And the simple reality
is, why are we here?
Because it's the
versatility of a system
to create all the art,
the music, the writing,
the sculptures, the
buildings, the technology.
We are creators.
If you want to let go
and die and give it to--
we can walk away.
The machine's going to create.
I'm going to die.
And I go, then why the hell were
you here in the first place?
And the idea is, from
my personal experience--
never experiencing it
until I was much older,
over 50, when I really had
an experience of love that
truly manifests that
I live in Heaven.
I wake up every day going,
oh, my god, I'm still here.
There's another day of social,
loving, physical, mental
expression-- fun, love,
living in a garden.
And once I understood
that, the first 50
years of the mechanism of Bruce
being the machine creating
all this kind of stuff, had
no real value until the day
I recognized the value of love,
because love is a destination.
And that's pretty interesting,
because today's world
is preoccupied with fear,
which is the complete opposite.
And until you get
out of this fear,
you are not going to
manage your evolution.
You're being manipulated by
a belief that's not real.
And as a result,
that's the illusion
that Einstein talked about.
This reality is an illusion.
You want a different reality?
Change your mind.
And all of a sudden, it
says, you are powerful.
You're not a victim.
If you believe you're
a victim, you are.
Oh, believe.
The book-- "The
Biology of Belief."
What the heck is that
about-- oh, my god,
that's about what we
just talked about.
[LAUGHTER]
>> Bravo.
Yeah, that's great.
Yeah.
I mean Bruce, unless there's
something else that you feel
like, yeah, we need
to say this part,
it's so relevant to what you're
doing, then I feel like--
>> I think you have a project
that I don't want to be involved
with.
I think you want to take
this down to five minutes
and I say, God bless
you for that effort.
>> I think it's mutual--
>> I have no idea
how you do that.
But that's a beautiful part.
OK, I leave.
And then sometime in the
future, you show me--
you see this three and a
half minute piece of you?
Everything you said
in an hour and a half
is in that three minutes.
Good job.
>> Oh, no.
I see you in different parts of
the series, not just like, Bruce
and then that's it.
Because you said,
you've covered so much.
>> Yeah, well that
was the problem.
There's three different books.
The first book is the biology
of how you create your own life.
The second book
is, well, if belief
is creating our life
experience, what
is the consequence
of mass belief?
Mass manifestation.
So that's spontaneous evolution.
It says, and look
what we created?
Self-destruction.
So that requires a new creation.
And the third one
was the honeymoon.
Because the honeymoon was, how--
besides yourself, we are
driven to be in community,
and the first community
is two people.
And if two people are
in love and two people
are living in harmony
and creativity,
well they're
enjoying this planet
like, oh, my god, the
garden that it really was.
And it's really interesting
because, by definition, a garden
is the height of community.
Every organism in that garden
is supporting the existence
of this beautiful garden.
And then it's
community and harmony.
And then humans
step into the garden
and put their big feet
all over everything,
are destroying things.
It's the belief that we
can do whatever we want.
No, it's a garden.
And as the Indigenous people
of this planet are still here
to help us-- because
we have forgotten--
that we are gardeners.
But we've been exploiting
it and taking it apart.
And the net result is we
are now looking at doomsday
not in thousand years.
We're talking within a century.
Human civilization
will be doomed
unless we change how we
relate to the environment,
because the first
thing is this--
we evolved from the garden.
We were never separate
from the garden.
And the idea that we could
stand outside and tell
the garden what to do is
like, oh, human hubris.
We're so smart.
Well, we're so smart then how
come we're facing a sixth mass
extinction?
>> And on that note.
[LAUGHTER]